I hope that from the previous few videos, you now have a pretty solid intuition for how gradient descent
works, why gradient descent works, and a geometric picture of it working in one dimensional functions.
So functions that can be graphed as a line.
In this video we are going to double the dimensionality of gradient descent.
We're going to go from one dimensional functions to two dimensional functions.
And you will see that gradient descent is the same.
The concept is the same, the algorithm is the same.
The even the code is basically the same in two dimensions as it is in one dimension.
We're also going to use this as an opportunity to continue exploring the possible difficulties of gradient
descent for finding global minima.
Okay, but first I want to start with a little bit of terminology.
This is actually some terminology that I have mentioned before about the derivative and the gradient.
But here I'm going to make it a little bit more explicit.
So you know that if we have a function that looks something like this, we can compute the derivative
which is the slope of the function at any given point.
So this thing here is called the derivative.
Now when we move to two dimensional functions there is a derivative along each dimension or each axis.
So there's a derivative with respect to this dimension.
Maybe we call this dimension x.
And there is another derivative of this function at each point with respect to this dimension.
Maybe we'll call this y.
So the at any given point we can compute what's called the partial derivative.
So the partial derivatives are the derivatives of the function.
Ignoring one dimension and only focusing on the other dimension.
So the partial derivative with respect to x means that we ignore y and we just see how is the function
changing over x.
And similar for y.
So we have two dimensions.
So that means we have two partial derivatives.
In this case you know you could call this a partial derivative with respect to x.
But there's no other variable to be partial to.
So we just call this the derivative.
Okay.
So we have two dimensions.
So that means we have two partial derivatives.
And then what we can do is take both of those partial derivatives.
Take those two partial derivatives and just put them in a list.
It would just be a two element vector, an array of partial derivatives.
And that is what we call the gradient.
So the gradient of the function at any given point is just a collection of all the partial derivatives
with respect to all the dimensions of that function.
So again that means that gradient is basically the same thing as a derivative.
It's just involving a little bit more, you know, more numbers because we have higher dimensionality.
Okay.
A little bit more about notations and terminology.
Here we have the derivative.
A couple of different ways of indicating the derivative.
And all three of these notations you've already seen before.
Now you know there are historical interesting reasons for these different notations to exist.
They come from the different mathematicians who developed the theory of calculus, but that is way beyond
the scope of what you need to know for this course.
Partial derivatives are indicated by this kind of funny looking curvy D symbol.
This is called a del.
Again, the notation doesn't really matter.
I don't want to get hung up on that.
This one is important though, because this you will see often.
So the gradient is indicated by this upside down triangle.
It's called a nabla nabla.
So it's nabla.
And it's just a collection of all the partial derivatives with respect to all of the different directions
or dimensions of the data.
Okay.
So with that notation and terminology aside, now let's get back to this crazy looking function.
This is the function that we are going to be working with in this video.
It's a pretty long involved function.
You can see it's a function of two variables.
So this is a two dimensional function x and y.
Now we can plot the value of this function at every location x and y every coordinate x and y.
And it's going to look something like this.
Pretty interesting looking function.
The yellow colors correspond to the peaks.
Blue colors correspond to the valleys.
Now what we are going to do is use gradient descent to find the minimum of this function.
So the global minimum is.
Here you can see we also have two local minima one here.
And this is an even lighter local minimum here.
And these are the peaks.
So this would be the global maximum.
And to local maxima.
And out here this greenish color this is basically zero.
It's essentially just a plane going out to infinity in all directions.
Okay.
So we will see that, you know if you start here, if you start the algorithm here, the initial guess,
then gradient descent is going to do a great job and and get us to the true local minimum.
If we start up here, you know this will be an interesting case to start in the the peak up here.
In fact, you know, we we have the benefit of looking at this entire function from the top.
You know, we have the bird's eye view.
We know where the, the, the local, the global minimum is.
But gradient descent doesn't actually know that.
So gradient descent if we start here gradient descent will actually go out here to the plane.
Now that's the correct thing to do from the perspective of gradient descent.
Gradient descent is doing is implementing the correct Algorithm, but if it has an unfortunate starting
point, it's not going to end up with a good solution.
That's something we will explore in the code in a little bit.
Okay, so let me make this a little more concrete.
Here's what we are going to do in a moment.
We're going to compute the gradient of the function.
We're going to compute the partial derivatives using SymPy.
And then we are going to repeat the gradient descent algorithm.
That loop.
It's exactly the same as in the previous couple of videos.
And there's a couple of minor adjustments.
Like now the local minimum is a two element list or a tuple or an array.
I forget exactly what data type I used here, but we will soon discover.
But anyway, it's two numbers for the local minimum x and y, not just one value x.
And then we're going to visualize.
And we're going to produce a graph that looks something like this.
This is a random starting location.
In this case it happened to start over here.
And this is the trajectory that gradient descent took.
And in this case it worked out super well.
We got exactly the right result.
All right.
So now we switch to Python and we will end up with a graph that looks something like this.
So we begin by importing the libraries that we need.
Here is a function that defines the large function that that I showed you the formula for this.
The name of this function is peaks.
It's often used in Matlab.
In fact it's part of the Matlab logo.
Is this function.
Now I haven't computed the derivative here.
Remember in the previous videos we I had two functions here one to define the function and another Python
function to define the derivative of the mathematical function.
Here I'm going to let sympy compute the derivative for me because this is a small nightmare.
If you, you know, if you're if you like suffering in calculus, then go for it and compute the derivative
of this by hand.
I'm going to let SymPy do the hard work for me.
Okay.
So let's look at this function first.
So here I create a a grid of coordinates x and y go from minus three to plus three.
I'm going to define this function.
Create this function.
And we use IMHO to have a look at this function.
Now this is nothing new because you just saw exactly what this function looks like in the slides a moment
ago.
Okay.
So here we create the the partial derivatives using SymPy.
So here I had to recreate this function because up here this is a function in numpy.
And here we need a SymPy function because these are symbolic variables x and y.
Now because this is a little bit more complicated, I had to go through a little bit more SymPy code
in order to get the function that creates the derivative.
So you still recognize this simdiff.
This is the function we used in previous videos to get the to compute the derivative.
You saw that in the the videos about derivatives in the previous section.
Here we have to specify which variable we want to compute the derivative with respect to.
So this is the derivative of z.
This symbolic function z with respect to x and with respect to y.
Now from here this is actually going to give me a symbolic object of the derivative.
I want to convert that symbolic function into a numpy function that I can then call.
And that's what lambdify does.
So sim dot lambdify will transform a SymPy object into a function that we can call, just like just
like this function up here.
Now, if everything I just said is weird and confusing and incomprehensible.
Don't worry about it.
As I mentioned before, we're only using SymPy in this course.
In this section, we're going to stop using SymPy pretty soon, so we're only using SymPy in the next
couple of videos.
You don't have to worry about all the details of the mechanics and all the functions in SymPy.
Okay.
And then this is just an example that's going to compute the partial derivative of the function with
respect to x at location one comma one.
So how do we interpret this value.
So the partial derivative of the function with respect to x at the .11 is minus one.
Let's see if we can make sense of that looking back at the function here.
So the .11 is somewhere around here.
And the gradient or the partial derivative with respect to x is minus one at this point.
And that means that the function is going down to the right as we go here to the right.
Now that's pretty clearly visible from the color scheme in this plot here.
Of course, in higher dimensions you can't just visualize this, but for 1D and 2D functions, we can
just look at the function and see how that relates to the sign of the derivative at each point in the
function.
All right.
So now we have a Python function that computes the the function.
The mathematical function peaks.
And we have SymPy functions that compute the partial derivatives.
And the collection of these two is going to be the gradient.
Okay.
So now we get to this cell of code.
Now this should look familiar.
This is pretty much exactly the same as the gradient descent code in the previous two videos.
There's just a couple of small modifications.
So we we define an initial starting point.
This is a random number I'm defining a random number somewhere between minus two and plus two.
And here we have two random numbers, because we have to have a starting x value and a starting y value.
Here's our two key parameters that we've learned a little bit about.
We'll talk a lot more about these later.
The learning rate and the number of training epochs.
Here we are looping through the number of training epochs.
And then here you can see we're computing the gradient.
So this is I define this to be a numpy array which contains two elements.
The first element is the the partial derivative with respect to x at our local minimum x y, and then
the partial derivative of the function with respect to y at exactly that same location.
And this is the gradient right here.
This these two elements organized in a numpy array.
And then here we update the local minimum according to itself minus the gradient times the learning
rate.
And then a little bit of extra code here because I'm.
Storing the trajectory.
That's for the visualization.
Okay.
So let's run this and we can see this is the final local minimum and the starting point.
Now I don't know whether these are the correct values.
So we are going to visualize this.
So we make an image of the function z.
This peaks function.
And then I'm going to plot dots according to the start location and the end location.
And then I'm going to plot the entire trajectory, which is basically showing how the model moved the
data point, the estimate of the local minimum over training epochs.
Okay, so this is pretty neat.
We started here and we got to this local minimum.
This is actually like the the least interesting local minimum.
This is the worst of the three local minima in this function.
So it's pretty interesting okay I'm going to run this again.
So run this one more time again starting with the different random location, so hopefully it will be
somewhere else, but it's unpredictable where it's going to start.
All right.
So it actually started on this peak and it went back.
It went back to the same local minimum, the same final estimate where it started at before.
Okay.
Now I encourage you to spend some time playing around with this code.
You can have a look through the additional explorations here and here.
I'm already suggesting to to force the initial starting guess to be an interesting location.
So in this video you have seen that gradient descent in two dimensions is basically the same as it is
in one dimension.
There's a little bit more housekeeping that's involved.
The code gets a little bit more complicated, but the principle is exactly the same.
And that also means that going from two dimensions up to a million dimensions is also exactly the same
thing as going from two dimensions to one dimension.